=== Page 1 ===
Bi-LAT: Bilateral Control-Based Imitation Learning via Natural
Language and Action Chunking with Transformers
Takumi Kobayashi1†, Masato Kobayashi1,2,3†∗, Thanpimon Buamanee1, Yuki Uranishi1,2
Abstract—We present Bi-LAT, a novel imitation learning
framework that unifies bilateral control with natural language
processing to achieve precise force modulation in robotic ma-
nipulation.Bi-LATleveragesjointposition,velocity,andtorque
data from leader-follower teleoperation while also integrating
visual and linguistic cues to dynamically adjust applied force.
By encoding human instructions such as “softly grasp the
cup” or “strongly twist the sponge” through a multimodal
Transformer-based model, Bi-LAT learns to distinguish nu-
anced force requirements in real-world tasks. We demonstrate
Bi-LAT’s performance in (1) unimanual cup-stacking scenario
where the robot accurately modulates grasp force based on
language commands, and (2) bimanual sponge-twisting task
that requires coordinated force control. Experimental results
show that Bi-LAT effectively reproduces the instructed force
levels, particularly when incorporating SigLIP among tested Fig. 1: Bilateral Control-Based Imitation Learning via Nat-
language encoders. Our findings demonstrate the potential
ural Language and Action Chunking with Transformers
of integrating natural language cues into imitation learning,
paving the way for more intuitive and adaptive human–robot
interaction. For additional material, please visit the website:
https://mertcookimg.github.io/bi-lat/ demonstrators only provide position commands. Although
these systems are relatively straightforward to implement,
I. INTRODUCTION
they often struggle to capture the rich force interactions
In today’s rapidly evolving landscape of robotics, inte- essential for manipulating fragile or deformable objects.
grating advanced manipulation capabilities with social in- In parallel with advances in imitation learning, the emer-
telligence is pivotal to shaping our hybrid future. Robotic gence of foundation models and large language models
manipulationplaysacentralroleinarangeofhuman-centric (LLM) has dramatically broadened the horizons of robotics
applications—from cooking assistance [1] and eldercare [2] research [7], [8]. Although these models have achieved
to dynamic interactive scenarios [3]—where robots are en- notable success in planning and semantic perception, they
visioned as collaborative partners. While conventional in- often fall short when it comes to the fine-grained control
dustrialrobotsexcelatexecutingpre-programmed,repetitive of force and torque, which are critical factors for safe and
actions,theemerginggenerationofserviceandcollaborative effective object manipulation.
robots must adapt to dynamic environments and handle To bridge this gap in force-centric manipulation, many
objects with diverse shapes and material properties. This researchers have turned to bilateral control, wherein both
transformationcallsforlearning-basedapproachesthatrepli- position and force information are exchanged between the
cate complex, human-like manipulation strategies, including human demonstrator and the robot [9]. Bilateral control-
precise force regulation, and that are seamlessly integrated based teleoperation enables the demonstrator to feel con-
into broader human-robot interaction frameworks. tact forces in real time, capturing more accurate physical
Amongthesemethods,imitationlearning(IL)hasemerged interactions for training data. Indeed, prior studies have
as an effective method for enabling robots to acquire new demonstrated that bilateral control-based imitation learning
skills directly from imitating human demonstrations [4]. By enables better generalization across objects with different
circumventing the need to explicitly design a reward func- hardness and weights compared to unilateral setups [10],
tion,ILaddressestasksthataredifficulttoformalize,suchas [11],[12].Recently,bilateralcontrol-basedimitationlearning
delicate assembly [5] or surgical procedures [6], and distills viaactionchunkingwithtransformers(Bi-ACT)[13]showed
expertknowledgeintoaparameterizedpolicy.However,most thatcombiningbilateralcontrolinformationandvisualinputs
existing IL frameworks in robotics traditionally assume uni- with Transformer-based models improves action accuracy.
lateral control-based teleoperation setups, in which human However, it does not yet incorporate natural language in-
structions specifying how much force to apply.
† Equal Contribution, 1 Graduate School of Information Science and In this paper, we propose Bi-LAT: Bilateral Control-
Technology,TheUniversityofOsaka,2D3Center,TheUniversityofOsaka,
Based Imitation Learning via Natural Language and Ac-
3GraduateSchoolofMaritimeSciences,KobeUniversity,*corresponding
author:kobayashi.masato.cmc@osaka-u.ac.jp tionChunkingwithTransformers.Byleveragingmultimodal
5202
luJ
82
]OR.sc[
2v10310.4052:viXra
=== Page 2 ===
Transformers that fuse robot information (joint angles, ve-
locities,torques),visualinformation,andlinguisticcues,Bi-
LATlinkseverydaylanguageinstructions(e.g.,“softlygrasp
the cup”) directly to explicit force modulation during task
execution. This integration enables robots to autonomously
adjust force based on higher-level, human-readable com-
mands rather than relying on numerically defined torque
thresholds. We validate Bi-LAT on two real-world tasks,
the unimanual cup-stacking task and the bimanual sponge-
twistingtask,bothhighlightingthenecessityofpreciseforce
Fig. 2: Bi-LAT: Data Collection
control.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose Bi-LAT, a bilateral control-based imitation Bi-ACT include ALPHA-α [9], a low-cost bimanual robotic
learning framework that integrates robot position and platform, and the data augmentation method for bilateral
force data, visual observations, and natural language control-based imitation learning with images (DABI) [15],
instructions. which enhances training data by downsampling both image
• We evaluate several language/text encoders in uniman- and robot data to improve learning efficiency.
ual cup-stacking scenario and demonstrate that the In this paper, we extend Bi-ACT by integrating natural
SigLIP text encoder particularly excels at modulating languageprocessingwithalanguage/textencoder,creatinga
grasp force according to language instructions. bilateral control-based imitation learning framework called
• We further demonstrate the effectiveness of Bi-LAT in Bi-LAT that generates actions based on human language
bimanual setting, where coordinated force control is instructions while effectively leveraging force information.
required to twist a deformable sponge, validating our
method for more complex tasks. B. Imitation Learning Using Language Models
This paper consists of six sections. Section II explains Traditionally,robots havebeencontrolled throughexplicit
Related Works. Section III proposes Bi-LAT method. Sec- programming, with commands defined as specific control
tions IV and V confirm the method’s efficiency based on values such as current, torque, and position. However, the
the unimanual and bimanual experimental results. Section adventoflanguagemodelshasrevolutionizedthisparadigm,
VI concludes this paper. enabling human operators to provide instructions using nat-
ural language [16], [17]. Large language models further
II. RELATEDWORKS
enhance a robot’s ability to interpret natural language in-
A. Bilateral Control-Based Imitation Learning structions and generate structured action plans, such as
determining the correct sequence of actions to execute a
Bilateralcontrolisusedfordatacollection,whichinvolves
task [7], [8]. The emergence of vision-language models
the remote operation of a follower robot in the environment,
(VLM) has facilitated the integration of visual and textual
guided by a leader robot controlled by human [9]. This
information, allowing robots to process and interpret images
approachprovidesoperatorswithforcefeedbackduringdata
andvideosalongsidelanguagecommands[18],[19].Collec-
collection, which is crucial for capturing motion data that
tively, these advancements represent a paradigm shift from
closely aligns with human intuition. These are achieved
rigid,pre-programmedinstructionstoflexible,context-aware,
through position tracking and the use of action-reaction
and human-intuitive interaction mechanisms.
principles.
In this paper, we proposed Bi-LAT. By linking linguistic
Many studies on bilateral control-based imitation learning
information with the haptic feedback provided by bilateral
employ neural network architecture such as Long Short-
control, Bi-LAT enables robots to execute tasks with precise
Term Memory (LSTM). For example, previous studies have
force modulation instructed by human operators.
demonstrated tasks like drawing straight lines along a ruler
[10], wiping a whiteboard with an eraser [11], and thinly
III. BI-LAT:BILATERALCONTROL-BASEDIMITATION
slicing cucumbers [12], all of which require precise force
LEARNINGVIANATURALLANGUAGEANDACTION
controlforsuccessfulexecution.Morerecently,Transformers
CHUNKINGWITHTRANSFORMERS
havegainedtractioninroboticcontrol.Notably,Bi-ACT[13]
A. Overview
integrates Action Chunking with Transformers (ACT) [14]
into bilateral control-based imitation learning. Bi-ACT pre- Bi-ACT leverages bilateral control to perform robot con-
dicts not only the next action but also sequences of actions, trol using both positional and force information, enabling
therebyaddressingtheissueofcumulativeerrors,acommon flexible adaptation even when handling previously unseen
challenge in imitation learning. Moreover, Bi-ACT extends objects.Additionally,byincorporatingimagedatafromRGB
bilateral control-based imitation learning by incorporating cameras, the system achieves visual-based robot control.
visualdata,whichenablesflexibleadaptationtoobjectswith Buildingonthisfoundation,theproposedmethodBi-LAT
varying weights and shapes. Recent developments related to integrates a language encoder into the framework to ensure
=== Page 3 ===
Fig. 3: Bi-LAT: Learning Model
Fig. 4: Language Encoder Fig. 5: Bi-LAT: Inference
thatgeneratedactionscorrespondtotheforcelevelspecified
enhance the performance of the language model, we employ
by the operator, as shown in Fig. 1. Incorporating natural
prompt engineering techniques that have proven effective
language processing techniques allows robots to execute
with Contrastive Language–Image Pre-training (CLIP) [22].
tasks based on user-provided natural language instructions.
Previous studies have indicated that CLIP’s accuracy can
B. Data Collection degrade when processing ambiguous sentences or isolated
words; however, appending the phrase “a photo of a” to the
Bi-LAT employs four-channel bilateral control method
beginning of a prompt has been shown to improve perfor-
for data collection. The key concept underlying bilateral
mance. We also apply similar prompt engineering strategies
control is that both the operator and the controlled target
during data collection.
continuously share position, force, and other relevant infor-
mationtoachievecoordinatedbehavior.Thiscoordinationis C. Language Encoder
mathematically characterized by the equations:
As shown in Fig. 4, we adopt several language encoders
θ −θ =0 (1) from CLIP [22] and Bidirectional Encoder Representations
l f
from Transformers (BERT) [23] architectures to convert
τ +τ =0 (2)
l f natural language instructions into distributed representations
In these expressions, θ denotes joint angles and τ denotes forprocessingbytheBi-LATmodel.Specifically,weemploy
torques,withthesubscripts⃝ and⃝ indicatingtheleader CLIP and its derivative, SigLIP [24], from the CLIP series,
l f
and follower systems. Encoders are used to capture joint alongwithDistilBERT[25]andModernBERT[26]fromthe
angles. Meanwhile, the torque response is estimated via BERT series. CLIP-based models excel at integrating visual
disturbanceobserver(DOB)[20]andreactionforceobserver and textual cues, whereas BERT-based models are highly
(RFOB) [21]. This method facilitates the estimation of envi- effective in natural language understanding. By leveraging
ronmental reaction torques without force/torque sensors. the strengths of these architectures, our approach enables
Bi-LAT extends the data collection process by incorporat- robustinterpretationoflanguagecommandsforpreciseforce
ing natural language instructions provided by the operator, control in robotic tasks.
as shown in Fig. 2. The operator teleoperates the follower
D. Learning Model
robotviatheleaderrobot,whilenaturallanguageinstructions
describingthemovementsarerecordedalongsiderobotjoint The Bi-LAT learning model is built upon a Transformer-
data and camera images. This additional modality enables driven Conditional Variational Autoencoder (CVAE) archi-
the system to later interpret these natural language cues for tecture, as illustrated in Fig. 3. In this framework, the
precise force control, effectively bridging the gap between model receives the follower robot joints’ angle, velocity,
human tactile perception and robotic actuation. To further and torque data along with corresponding visual inputs
=== Page 4 ===
Fig. 6: Unimanual Experimental Environment Fig. 7: Detailed Cup-Stacking Task
and natural language instructions. Based on this multimodal
input, the model outputs sequences of action chunks that
specify the predicted joint angles, velocities, and torques of
leader robots. Natural language instructions are processed
by a dedicated language encoder (LE), which converts the
Fig. 8: Training Data of Joint5 (Gripper)
textual commands into fixed-length vector representations.
In this paper, we select four language encoders among
many available options, namely DistilBERT, ModernBERT,
B. Experimental Conditions
CLIP, and SigLIP, as shown in Fig. 4. These linguistic
features are integrated with visual features extracted from To verify that language instructions are correctly associ-
ResNet-18 and the follower robot’s joint angles, velocities, ated with the robot’s joint position and torque values, we
and torques to form a comprehensive latent representation. conductedacup-stackingexperimentusingthreepapercups.
This representation is then passed through the CVAE-based The deformable nature of these cups allowed us to test
Transformerdecoder,whichpredictsthefutureleaderrobot’s whether the robot could autonomously control its grasping
actions as a series of action chunks. The learning process is force based on natural language instructions.
driven by minimizing the error between the predicted leader AsdepictedinFig.7,thecup-stackingtaskisdividedinto
joint data and the corresponding ground-truth data collected three stages:
during bilateral control teleoperation. • Pick: The robot moves from its initial position to the
front of the cup, opens its gripper, moves forward, and
E. Inference
then closes its gripper to grasp the cup.
Fig. 5 illustrates the operational diagram for Bi-LAT • Move: While maintaining its grip on the cup, the robot
inference. During inference, the Bi-LAT model receives the moves to the apex of the two centrally placed cups.
mostrecentjointdatafromthefollowerrobotalongwithcor- • Place: The robot opens its gripper in the center of the
responding camera images and natural language instruction two base cups to release and place the cup.
specifyingthedesiredaction.Basedonthisinput,themodel To examine the effect of varying force requirements, we
predicts the subsequent action chunk of leader robot’s joints collected demonstrations for two distinct instructions:
information. Bi-LAT outputs action data that include joint
• “Softly grasp the cup” (lighter grip force)
angles, velocities, and torques for each joint. These outputs
• “Strongly grasp the cup” (firmer grip force)
are then converted into the requisite current for each joint
Because the paper cups were deformable, these instruc-
by calculations performed by the bilateral control system.
tionsproducednoticeablydifferenttorqueprofiles,especially
IV. UNIMANUALEXPERIMENT during the grasping phase.
A. Hardware C. Training Setup
Fig. 6 shows the environment in which the unimanual Jointangles,angularvelocities,andtorqueswererecorded
experiment was conducted. We used the OpenManipulator- from the leader and follower robots using the four-channel
X from ROBOTIS. This manipulator features four joints bilateral control system, operating at a control frequency of
(Joint1 to Joint4) for arm rotation, while Joint5 is dedicated 1000Hz.Thisresultedin15-dimensionaljointdata(3values
togripperactuation.Intheunimanualexperiment,tworobot × 5 joints) per robot, and 30-dimensional joint data in total
arms were used: one configured as the leader robot and across both robots, capturing detailed motor-level dynamics
the other as the follower robot. For collecting image data, essentialforimitationlearning.Simultaneously,RGBimages
we used the ELP USB camera (model ELP-USBFHD08S- were captured from three cameras at a frequency of 100 Hz.
L36),whichcapturesRGBimagesataresolutionof640×360 AsshowninFig.8,eachdemonstrationwaspairedwitha
pixels. Three of these cameras were deployed overhead, on natural language instruction. Among the six demonstrations,
the side, and on the gripper to ensure comprehensive visual three involved “softly grasp the cup”, while the other three
coverage. involved “strongly grasp the cup.” Histograms for Joint5
=== Page 5 ===
TABLE I: Cup-Stacking Success Rates
Method Instruction SuccessRate ForceAccuracy
Bi-ACT(None) NoInstruction 5/5(100%) ×
Softly 5/5(100%)
Bi-LAT(DistilBERT) △
Strongly 5/5(100%)
Softly 5/5(100%)
Bi-LAT(ModernBERT) ×
Strongly 5/5(100%)
Softly 5/5(100%) (a) Bi-ACT (None)
Bi-LAT(CLIP) ×
Strongly 5/5(100%)
Softly 5/5(100%)
Bi-LAT(SigLIP) ⃝
Strongly 5/5(100%)
(b) Bi-LAT (DistilBERT)
(c) Bi-LAT (ModernBERT)
Fig.9:AutonomousExecutionusingBi-ACT(NoLanguage
Instructions) and using Bi-LAT (with SigLIP)
(Gripper)angleandtorqueduringthegraspingphasesupport
these findings. Under the “softly grasp the cup” instruction, (d) Bi-LAT (CLIP)
most joint angles are distributed between 2.45 and 2.60 rad,
with torques between 0 and 0.05 Nm. Under the “strongly
grasp the cup” instruction, most joint angles concentrate
between 2.65 and 2.75 rad, with torques between 0.15 and
0.20 Nm.
Moreover, to augment the training data, we employed
(e) Bi-LAT (SigLIP)
the DABI [15]. DABI is particularly effective when high-
frequency robot sensor data and lower-frequency image data Fig. 10: Results of Gripper Joint5 Angle and Torque
arecollectedsimultaneously.Bydownsamplingthe1000Hz
control data to 100 Hz, DABI expanded the original six
demonstrations to 60, thereby increasing the dataset size by
andtorquesbetween0.10and0.20Nm.Thisresultindicates
a factor of ten. For additional details, please refer to [15].
that the Bi-ACT model is unable to differentiate between
Basedonthisdataset,wetrainedBi-ACT,andBi-LATusing
the“softly”and“strongly”actions,therebyfailingtoencode
DistilBERT, ModernBERT, CLIP text encoder, and SigLIP
the nuanced force requirements for varying task conditions.
text encoder. We configured Bi-LAT models with 4 encoder
These findings underscore the necessity of incorporating
layers and 7 decoder layers.
natural language cues to guide force modulation, ultimately
D. Experiment Result enablingamorepreciseandcontext-awareimitationlearning
As shown in Table I, the cup-stacking task was success- process.
fully achieved in 100% of trials. Fig. 9 shows the results We tested action-oriented prompts, “softly grasp the cup”
of autonomous execution using the conventional Bi-ACT and “strongly grasp the cup”, to determine whether Bi-LAT
(no language instructions) and Bi-LAT with SigLIP as the could replicate the training distributions shown in Fig. 8.
language encoder. Whiletheoveralltaskwasexecutedsuccessfully,timeseries
In the conventional Bi-ACT model, which was trained graph and histogram analyses revealed varying levels of
without language inputs, data from both “softly” and differentiation among the language models. For example,
“strongly”demonstrationsweremergedintoasingletraining as shown in Fig. 10(b), DistilBERT produced a joint angle
set. As a result, the model treated both force modalities as distribution for “softly grasp the cup” between 2.65 and
equivalent aspects of the same task. As shown in Fig. 10(a), 2.7 rad, while for “strongly grasp the cup” the joint angles
whennolanguageinstructionwasprovided,theinferredjoint exceeded 2.7 rad, and corresponding torques were near 0
angle and torque profiles were biased toward strong force Nm and around 0.20 Nm, respectively. However, compared
characteristics, with joint angles distributed around 2.75 rad to the training data, the motions generated for “softly grasp
=== Page 6 ===
Fig. 11: Data Collection of Sponge-Twisting Task using ALPHA-α
control cycle was set to 1000 Hz for precise movement
and data collection of joint angle, velocity, and torque.
Furthermore, four RGB cameras were positioned overhead,
on the side, and on the right and left gripper joints of the
follower robots to capture visual observations.
B. Experimental Conditions
To evaluate the effectiveness of Bi-LAT with SigLIP in
linkingnaturallanguageinstructionstoroboticmotorbehav-
ior,weranasponge-twistingtaskviabilateralteleoperation.
Fig. 12: Bimanual Experimental Environment
As illustrated in Fig. 11, the sponge-twisting task consists
of three stages:
the cup” exhibited higher than expected angles and torques. • Grab: The robots open their grippers, move forward,
Incontrast,theresultsshowninFig.10(c)forModernBERT and close them to grasp the sponge.
and Fig. 10(d) for CLIP demonstrated some differentiation • Lift: The sponge is lifted from the table surface.
in the maximum values, but the overall distributions did not • Twist: The sponge is twisted while being held.
clearlydistinguishbetweenthetwoconditions.Mostnotably, To examine the effect of varying force requirements, we
Fig.10(e)showsthatSigLIPprovidedtheclearestseparation, collected demonstrations for two distinct instructions:
withtheinferencedataforeachinstructioncloselymatching • “Softly twist the sponge” (lighter grip force)
the training distributions. • “Strongly twist the sponge” (firmer grip force)
Thesefindingsconfirmthatincorporatingnaturallanguage Becausethespongewasdeformable,theseinstructionsin-
cues into a bilateral control-based imitation learning frame- ducednoticeablydifferenttorqueprofiles,particularlyduring
work is essential for precise force modulation. By aligning the grabbing and twisting phases.
with the distributions in the training data, SigLIP-based
Bi-LAT can effectively map language instructions to the C. Training Setup
appropriate joint angle and torque profiles. Jointangles,angularvelocities,andtorqueswererecorded
fromboththeleaderandfollowerrobotsusingthe4-channel
V. BIMANUALEXPERIMENT
bilateral control system, operating at the control frequency
A. Hardware
of 1000 Hz. This resulted in 21-dimensional joint data (3
As shown in Fig. 12, the bimanual robots ALPHA-α[9] values×7joints)perrobot,and84-dimensionaldataintotal
wereusedforexperimentsinbimanualroboticmanipulation. across both robots, capturing detailed motor-level dynamics
A total of four robots were employed, including two leader essentialforimitationlearning.Simultaneously,RGBimages
robots operated by the human operator and two follower were captured from four cameras at a frequency of 100 Hz.
robots. Each robot features 6 degrees of freedom (DOF) for As shown in Fig. 14, each demonstration was paired with
versatile movement, and an additional DOF for the gripper, anaturallanguageinstruction;amongthesixdemonstrations,
utilizing a total of 7 motors for its operation. The bilateral three involved “strongly twist the sponge”, while the other
=== Page 7 ===
Fig. 13: Results of Sponge-Twisting Task using ALPHA-α
Fig. 14: Training Data of Follower Robots Fig. 15: Results of Follower Robots via Bi-LAT
TABLEII:Sponge-TwistingSuccessRatesbyStage(Bi-LAT D. Experiment Result
with SigLIP)
AsshowninFig.13,weconductedautonomousexecutions
Instruction Pick Lift Twist Overall of the sponge-twisting task under two distinct instructions:
Softly 5/5(100%) 5/5(100%) 5/5(100%) 5/5(100%) “softlytwistthesponge”and“stronglytwistthesponge.”As
Strongly 5/5(100%) 5/5(100%) 4/5(80%) 4/5(80%)
summarizedinTableII,thesystemachieveda100%success
rate across all Pick, Lift, Twist phases under the soft twist
instruction. In contrast, under the strong twist instruction,
Pick and Lift both succeeded in 100% of trials, whereas
three involved “softly twist the sponge.” The histograms
Twist succeeded in four out of five trials (80%). A closer
were generated from data captured after six seconds, cor-
examination of the failure case revealed that the sponge’s
responding to the interval in which the sponge was actively
higher internal resistance caused the robot to lose a secure
grasped.Underthe“softlytwistthesponge”instruction,most
grip during twisting.
joint angles were distributed between 3.0 and 3.25 rad, with
Duringautonomousexecution,asshowninFig.15,theBi-
torques between 0 and 0.10 Nm. Under the “strongly twist
LATmodelfollowedcomparablespatialtrajectoriesforboth
the sponge” instruction, joint angles concentrated between
“soft” and “strong” conditions, yet produced markedly dif-
3.25 and 3.5 rad, with torques between 0.10 and 0.30 Nm.
ferent torque profiles. Red lines represent strongly grasped-
By applying DABI, we expanded the original six demon- and-twisted runs, while blue lines indicate softly grasped-
strations into 60 by downsampling the 1000 Hz control data and-twistedruns.Althoughtheoverallmotionssharesimilar
to 100 Hz, thereby increasing the dataset size by a factor paths, torque values diverge sharply during grasping and
of ten. Based on this dataset, we trained Bi-LAT using the twisting. Furthermore, histograms of both joint angles and
SigLIPtextencoderandconfiguredthemodelwith4encoder torques confirm that the two conditions form distinct dis-
layers and 7 decoder layers. tributions that closely match their respective training data.
=== Page 8 ===
These results demonstrate the model’s ability to modulate [9] M.Kobayashi,T.Buamanee,andT.Kobayashi,“Alpha-α andbi-act
force based on natural language instructions rather than areallyouneed:Importanceofpositionandforceinformation/control
forimitationlearningofunimanualandbimanualroboticmanipulation
reproducing a uniform trajectory, showcasing the value of
withlow-costsystem,”IEEEAccess,2025.
integrating language cues into a bilateral control-based imi- [10] T.Adachi,K.Fujimoto,S.Sakaino,andT.Tsuji,“Imitationlearning
tation learning framework for nuanced force control. for object manipulation based on position/force information using
bilateral control,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
IntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,2018,pp.3648–3653.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
[11] K. Hayashi, S. Sakaino, and T. Tsuji, “An independently learnable
hierarchicalmodelforbilateralcontrol-basedimitationlearningappli-
This paper presented Bi-LAT, a novel framework that
cations,”IEEEAccess,vol.10,pp.32766–32781,2022.
integrates natural language processing into bilateral control- [12] S. Sakaino, K. Fujimoto, Y. Saigusa, and T. Tsuji, “Imitation learn-
basedimitationlearningtoachieveintuitiveforcemodulation ing for variable speed contact motion for operation up to control
bandwidth,”IEEEOpenJournaloftheIndustrialElectronicsSociety,
in robotic manipulation. Building on the foundation of Bi-
vol.3,pp.116–127,2022.
ACT,Bi-LATleveragesvisual,proprioceptive,andlinguistic [13] T.Buamanee,M.Kobayashi,Y.Uranishi,andH.Takemura,“Bi-act:
data to generate actions that accurately reflect the nuanced Bilateral control-based imitation learning via action chunking with
transformer,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Advanced
force levels specified by human operators.
IntelligentMechatronics(AIM). IEEE,2024,pp.410–415.
Experimentsinbothunimanualandbimanualsettingscon- [14] T.Z.Zhao,V.Kumar,S.Levine,andC.Finn,“Learningfine-grained
firmed that Bi-LAT reliably reproduces a range of force in- bimanual manipulation with low-cost hardware,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.13705,2023.
tensities,particularlywhenusingSigLIPasthetextencoder.
[15] M. Kobayashi, T. Buamanee, and Y. Uranishi, “Dabi: Evaluation of
Thisprecisioninforcemodulation,integratedwithlanguage- data augmentation methods using downsampling in bilateral control-
based commands and haptic feedback, demonstrates the based imitation learning with images,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.04370
framework’srobustnessinadaptingtodynamicmanipulation
[16] S. Stepputtis, J. Campbell, M. Phielipp, S. Lee, C. Baral, and
tasks. Our results underscore the potential of combining bi- H.BenAmor,“Language-conditionedimitationlearningforrobotma-
lateralcontrol-basedimitationlearningwithnaturallanguage nipulationtasks,”AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,
vol.33,pp.13139–13150,2020.
cues to enhance the adaptability and intuitiveness of robotic
[17] H.Zhou,Z.Bing,X.Yao,X.Su,C.Yang,K.Huang,andA.Knoll,
manipulation.Thehybridapproachenhancescomplexobject “Language-conditionedimitationlearningwithbaseskillpriorsunder
manipulationandpromotesseamlesshuman-robotcollabora- unstructured data,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 9,
no.11,pp.9805–9812,2024.
tion across service, industrial, and assistive robotics.
[18] J.Gao,B.Sarkar,F.Xia,T.Xiao,J.Wu,B.Ichter,A.Majumdar,and
Future work will address more diverse object properties D. Sadigh, “Physically grounded vision-language models for robotic
includingrigidanddeformablematerials,incorporatevarying manipulation,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
andAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,2024,pp.12462–12469.
task difficulties, refine real-time language interactions, and
[19] D. Li, C. Zhao, S. Yang, L. Ma, Y. Li, and W. Zhang, “Learning
explore large-scale datasets for enhanced generalization. instruction-guided manipulation affordance via large models for em-
bodiedrobotictasks,”in2024InternationalConferenceonAdvanced
RoboticsandMechatronics(ICARM). IEEE,2024,pp.662–667.
REFERENCES
[20] K. Ohnishi, M. Shibata, and T. Murakami, “Motion control for
advanced mechatronics,” IEEE/ASME transactions on mechatronics,
[1] J.Liu,Y.Chen,Z.Dong,S.Wang,S.Calinon,M.Li,andF.Chen,
vol.1,no.1,pp.56–67,1996.
“Robot cooking with stir-fry: Bimanual non-prehensile manipulation
[21] T. Murakami, F. Yu, and K. Ohnishi, “Torque sensorless control in
ofsemi-fluidobjects,”IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.7,
multidegree-of-freedommanipulator,”IEEETransactionsonIndustrial
no.2,pp.5159–5166,2022.
Electronics,vol.40,no.2,pp.259–265,2002.
[2] X.Liu,C.Huang,H.Zhu,Z.Wang,J.Li,andA.Cangelosi,“State-
[22] A.Radford,J.W.Kim,C.Hallacy,A.Ramesh,G.Goh,S.Agarwal,
of-the-artelderlyservicerobot:Environmentalperception,compliance
G.Sastry,A.Askell,P.Mishkin,J.Clark,etal.,“Learningtransferable
control,intentionrecognition,andresearchchallenges,”IEEESystems,
visual models from natural language supervision,” in International
Man,andCyberneticsMagazine,vol.10,no.1,pp.2–16,2024.
conferenceonmachinelearning. PmLR,2021,pp.8748–8763.
[3] Y.-L.Tsai,P.R.Bana,S.Loiselle,andH.Knight,“Sanitizerbot:How
[23] J.Devlin,M.-W.Chang,K.Lee,andK.Toutanova,“Bert:Pre-training
human-in-the-loop social robots can playfully support humans,” in
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in
2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter
Systems(IROS). IEEE,2022,pp.8278–8285.
of the association for computational linguistics: human language
[4] M.Zare,P.M.Kebria,A.Khosravi,andS.Nahavandi,“Asurveyof
technologies,2019,pp.4171–4186.
imitationlearning:Algorithms,recentdevelopments,andchallenges,”
[24] X. Zhai, B. Mustafa, A. Kolesnikov, and L. Beyer, “Sigmoid loss
IEEETransactionsonCybernetics,vol.54,no.12,2024.
for language image pre-training,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
[5] L. Ankile, A. Simeonov, I. Shenfeld, and P. Agrawal, “Juicer: Data-
internationalconferenceoncomputervision,2023,pp.11975–11986.
efficient imitation learning for robotic assembly,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ
[25] V.Sanh,L.Debut,J.Chaumond,andT.Wolf,“Distilbert,adistillfed
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
version of bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter,” arXiv preprint
IEEE,2024,pp.5096–5103.
arXiv:1910.01108,2019.
[6] R.Arduini,Y.Michel,H.Singh,J.Klodmann,andD.Lee,“Learning
[26] B. Warner, A. Chaffin, B. Clavie´, O. Weller, O. Hallstro¨m,
from demonstration of robot motions and stiffness behaviors for
S.Taghadouini,A.Gallagher,R.Biswas,F.Ladhak,T.Aarsen,etal.,
surgicalbluntdissection,”in202433rdIEEEInternationalConference
“Smarter, better, faster, longer: A modern bidirectional encoder for
onRobotandHumanInteractiveCommunication(ROMAN). IEEE,
fast, memory efficient, and long context finetuning and inference,”
2024,pp.1491–1496.
arXivpreprintarXiv:2412.13663,2024.
[7] A. Brohan, Y. Chebotar, C. Finn, K. Hausman, A. Herzog, D. Ho,
J.Ibarz,A.Irpan,E.Jang,R.Julian,etal.,“Doasican,notasisay:
Grounding language in robotic affordances,” in Conference on robot
learning. PMLR,2023,pp.287–318.
[8] S. S. Kannan, V. L. Venkatesh, and B.-C. Min, “Smart-llm: Smart
multi-agentrobottaskplanningusinglargelanguagemodels,”in2024
IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems
(IROS). IEEE,2024,pp.12140–12147.