=== Page 1 ===
FACTR: Force-Attending Curriculum Training for
Contact-Rich Policy Learning
Jason Jingzhou Liu∗, Yulong Li∗, Kenneth Shaw, Tony Tao, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Deepak Pathak
Carnegie Mellon University
∗Equal contribution
Fig. 1: FACTR. We present Force-Attending Curriculum Training (FACTR) – a system that leverages robot external joint torques for both
teleoperation and improving policy generalization for complex contact-rich tasks. [Left] Our low-cost leader-follower setup employs actuated
servo motors to enable force feedback in both the leader arm and gripper, improving teleoperation success rate, completion time, and ease of
use. [Right] FACTR’s behavior cloning policy utilizes robot force information to enhance performance and generalization across objects with
diverse geometries and textures in contact-rich tasks. Video results, codebases, and instructions at https://jasonjzliu.com/factr/
Abstract—Many contact-rich tasks humans perform, such as interplay of forces and require precise adjustments based on
box pickup or rolling dough, rely on force feedback for reliable force feedback. Humans rely heavily on this force feedback
execution. However, this force information, which is readily avail-
to generalize across tasks and objects, adapting seamlessly to
able in most robot arms, is not commonly used in teleoperation
variations in visual appearances and geometries. However, in
andpolicylearning.Consequently,robotbehaviorisoftenlimited
to quasi-static kinematic tasks that do not require intricate force- robot learning, force information remains underutilized, even
feedback. In this paper, we first present a low-cost, intuitive, though it is readily available on many modern robotic arms,
bilateral teleoperation setup that relays external forces of the such as the Franka Panda and the KUKA LBR iiwa. Instead,
follower arm back to the teacher arm, facilitating data collection
most data-driven methods, including those using Behavior
for complex, contact-rich tasks. We then introduce FACTR, a
Cloning(BC),focusprimarilyonvisualfeedbackforbothdata
policylearningmethodthatemploysacurriculumwhichcorrupts
the visual input with decreasing intensity throughout training. collection and policy learning, overlooking the critical role of
The curriculum prevents our transformer-based policy from over- force. This limited use of force information hinders the vision-
fitting to the visual input and guides the policy to properly onlypolicies’abilitytogeneralizetonovelobjects.Forinstance,
attend to the force modality. We demonstrate that by fully
in tasks like lifting up a box with two arms, the primary factor
utilizing the force information, our method significantly improves
influencing the action is the object’s geometry, while attributes
generalization to unseen objects by 43% compared to baseline
approaches without a curriculum. Video results, codebases, and such as color or texture are irrelevant. In such cases, force
instructions at https://jasonjzliu.com/factr/ feedback provides a clear signal for mode switching, such
as detecting when contact is established, which can facilitate
I. INTRODUCTION
object generalization compared to relying solely on vision.
Contact-rich tasks are an integral part of daily life, from One of the main reasons for the under-utilization of force
liftingaboxandrollingdoughtocrackinganeggoropeninga feedback in robot learning is the lack of an intuitive and low-
door. These tasks, while seemingly simple, involve a complex costteleoperationsystemthatcancaptureforcefeedbackduring
5202
rpA
42
]OR.sc[
2v23471.2052:viXra
=== Page 2 ===
datacollectionitself.Recently,low-costleader-followersystems
havebecomepopularforteleoperation,offeringintuitivecontrol
of robot arms by mirroring the joint movements of the leader
arm controlled by a teleoperator to the follower arm [32, 29].
However, these systems are typically passive (leader arm
joints are not actuated) and unilateral (the leader arm does
not receive information from the follower arm). This makes
teleoperation difficult for dynamic, contact-rich tasks where
precise force adjustments are necessary [22]. To overcome this
limitation, we present a bilateral low-cost teleoperation system
that provides force feedback by actuating motors in the leader
arm joints based on external joint torques transmitted from the
follower arm (Fig. 1 Left). By actuating the motors, we also
provide active gravity compensation and resolve the kinematic Fig. 2: Our low-cost bimanual teleoperation system with force-
feedback.Thesystemfeaturestwoactuatedleaderarms,twofollower
redundancy due to the redundant degrees of freedom of the
arms with external joint torque sensors (such as the Franka Panda
arm.Theseenhancementsimprovetheteleoperationexperience,
and the KUKA LBR iiwa), a front camera and two wrist cameras.
leadingtoa64.7%increaseinthetaskcompletionrate,a37.4%
reduction in completion time, and an 83.3% improvement in (Fig. 1 Right) – box lifting, prehensile pivoting, fruit pick-
subjective ease of use across four evaluated contact-rich tasks. and-place, and dough rolling – showcasing the efficacy of our
The second challenge lies in effectively incorporating robot force-attending curriculum training.
forceinformationintopolicylearning.Althoughrecentmethods In summary, our contributions are as follows.
such as diffusion policy [4] and action chunking transformers • Low-Cost Teleoperation with Force Feedback: We
[32] achieve impressive results for fine-grained manipulation, design a low-cost bilateral leader-follower teleoperation
they often fail to generalize to unseen objects with variations system with force feedback, gravity compensation, and
in object visual appearances and geometries. Humans, on the redundancy resolution, demonstrating a 64.7% improve-
other hand, can disregard irrelevant visual details once contact ment in task completion rate and an 83.3% enhancement
is established and rely solely on force feedback to perform in ease of use for teleoperation through a user study.
tasks such as lifting a box or rolling dough. Therefore, to • Force-Attending Curriculum Training: We propose
improve generalization, we seek to incorporate force input FACTR,acurriculumtrainingframeworkthatbetterlearns
into autonomous robot policies. However, making effective touseforcefeedbackinpolicylearningandachievesbetter
use of force information in policy learning is challenging, as generalization capability to object visual appearances and
policies often overfit to using visual modality [28], effectively geometries. Evaluated on four challenging contact-rich
disregarding force data. This issue arises because contact force tasks, FACTR improves the performance of autonomous
signals are typically less discriminative, often remaining near policies by 40.0% compared to policies with force
zero for extended periods when the arm is not in contact with information as part of input but trained without FACTR.
the environment during an episode. Hence, without proper care
during training, policies tend to ignore force input and rely II. RELATEDWORKS
primarily on visual information. We empirically analyze this
A. Imitation Learning with Force
effect in Sec. V-C and Fig. 9.
To mitigate this imbalance, we propose Force-Attending Imitation learning has recently experienced significant ad-
Curriculum Training (FACTR), a curriculum training strategy vancements, driven by the development of more effective
designed to improve the policy’s ability to effectively leverage algorithms that leverage demonstrations to train robotic poli-
force information. FACTR systematically reduces the reliance cies [17, 4]. Although traditional approaches primarily rely on
on visual information during training by applying operators visual and joint position inputs, many real-world tasks require
suchasGaussianblurringordownsamplingwithvaryingscales explicit force feedback to improve stability, adaptability, and
to visual inputs. A scheduler gradually decreases the blurring safety [18, 9]. Recent work has applied learning methods to
scale and increases the fidelity of the visual inputs. Intuitively, train with demonstrations that incorporate gripper force or
this approach encourages the policy to focus more on force tactile signals, resulting in policies capable of handling small,
input during initial training phases and gradually balances fragile objects and performing contact-intensive tasks such as
force with visual inputs as training progresses. We ground this vegetable peeling [15, 31, 14]. However, utilizing force data
intuition with a theoretical analysis on a simplified scenario from the robot arms, such as joint torques, remains under-
through the framework of Neural Tangent Kernels [11]. We explored. One approach involves using an end-effector force
exploreFACTRinboththepixelspaceandlatentspace,testing sensor to estimate compliance parameters or virtual position
various operators and scheduling strategies. Our experiments targets through kinesthetic teaching and force tensors [10, 3].
show that FACTR improves the success rate for unseen objects Another method infers a 6D wrench for low-level control by
by an average of 40.0% in four challenging contact-rich tasks integrating torque sensing into a diffusion policy [30].
=== Page 3 ===
However, naively incorporating force feedback into policy forming a scaled-down but kinematically equivalent version of
learning can lead to overfitting to visual information, causing the follower arms, as shown in Fig. 2. By actuating the servo
thepolicytodisregardforceinput.FoAR[8]explicitlypredicts motors, we introduce force feedback, customizable redundancy
contact and non-contact phases to regulate the fusion of vision resolution through nullspace projection, gravity and friction
and force modalities, which requires additional data labeling. compensation, and joint limit avoidance. These functionalities
We propose FACTR to effectively incorporate force and vision augment the teleoperation experience while still using low-cost
input into policy through a curriculum, enabling policies to hardware to provide functions that are usually only available
leverage force for improved object generalization. with much more expensive teleoperation devices. Please see
Appendix VIII for a detailed Bill of Materials.
B. Low-Cost Teleoperation Systems with Force Feedback
A. Force Feedback
Parallel to advances in imitation learning, significant efforts
have been made to collect low-cost and high-quality data with Forcefeedbackprovidestheoperatorwithatangiblesenseof
hand-held grippers [27, 5] or leader-follower systems [32, 29, interaction with the environment, allowing more intuitive and
25]. Hand-held grippers naturally provide force feedback to delicate manipulation, especially in contact-rich tasks or tasks
the operator, but they do not directly record force data. Recent with limited visual feedback [22]. We implement a control law
work has added force sensors to hand-held grippers to address that relays external joint torques sensed by the follower arm
thislimitation[15].However,hand-heldgrippersareingeneral to the leader arm, allowing the operator to feel the physical
limited by the kinematic differences between humans and constraints experienced by the follower arm:
robots, resulting in commands that might be unachievable for
τ =µ K τ −K q˙ (1)
the robots. Although the leader-follower systems are not prone feedback f f,p ext f,d
to this limitation, they often lack force feedback, impairing where µ is a scalar constant, τ is the external joint torque
f ext
their effectiveness in contact-rich tasks. Recently, Kobayashi et sensed by the follower arm, K and K are the PD gains
f,p f,d
al. [13] implemented a bilateral leader-follower teleoperation fortheforcefeedback,respectively.Here,K iscalculatedas
f,p
system where in addition to the follower following the joint theratiobetweenthemaximumtorqueoftheleaderandthatof
positionsoftheleader,theleaderalsogetsanadditionaltorque the follower, and K q˙ helps reduce oscillations in the leader
f,d
if there is a difference in its joint position from that of the arm when the follower arm is in contact. We note that τ is
ext
follower.However,whenthefollowerarmisinmotionwithout a readily available measurement in various collaborative robot
contact, this system causes the operator to experience inertial, manipulators, such as the Franka Panda and the KUKA LBR
frictional, and other dynamic forces of the follower, reducing iiwa. In particular, we implement mediated force feedback by
the ease of use and precision of the system [26]. Our approach scaling down τ with µ , which has been shown to improve
ext f
introduces an alternative bilateral teleoperation method by the accuracy of the operation while reducing the cognitive
relayingonlyexternaljointtorquesfromthefollowerarmback load of the operator [33]. Furthermore, we highlight that our
to the leader arm, providing force feedback without impairing implementationonlytransmitsexternalforcesfromthefollower
operational precision. to the leader; as a result, the operator does not experience the
internal friction and inertia of the follower arm during motion,
III. FACTRLOW-COSTBILATERALTELEOPERATION
providing a clearer perception of the environment [26].
Leader-follower systems, such as GELLO [29] or In addition, we implement force feedback for the parallel-
ALOHA [32], offer a simple and cost-effective solution to jaw gripper. Since our servo-based gripper does not contain
teleoperation in manipulation tasks. These systems feature an external force sensor, we utilize the present current reading
kinematically equivalent leader and follower arms, allowing of the gripper servo to provide force feedback as follows:
intuitivecontrolthroughjointspacemapping,wheretheleader’s
τ =α(−k I )+(1−α)τ (2)
joint positions are mirrored as targets for the follower. This h,t h g,t h,t−1
setup lets users naturally feel the follower arms’ kinematic whereτ istheforcefeedbacktorquesenttothegripperleader
h,t
constraints. However, most implementations lack force feed- device, I is the present current reading from the follower
g,t
back, preventing users from sensing the geometric constraints gripper, and α is the smoothing factor for the EMA filter. Our
of the environment, which is crucial for teleoperating contact- system sets α=0.1 which provides a good user experience.
rich tasks [22]. Instead, those leader arms are mostly passive,
B. Customizable Redundancy Resolution
lacking active motor torque actuation, despite being equipped
with servo motors capable of actuation. Furthermore, the For kinematic redundant manipulators, without regulating
lack of active torque means the leader arms require external the joint space, the manipulator tends to drift into unde-
structuralframesandrubberbandsorstringstoachievegravity sirable configurations under the influence of gravity during
compensation, reducing portability [32]. teleoperation. Approaches like Gello [29] rely on mechan-
Inthispaper,weaimtofullyleveragetheservomotorsinthe ical components, such as springs, to regularize the joint
leaderarmandgrippertoachieveforce-feedbackenabledteleop- space. However, these components introduce non-uniform,
erationwithaffordablehardware.SimilarlytoGELLO[29],our configuration-dependent wrenches at the end-effector, resulting
leaderarmsuseoff-the-shelfservosand3D-printedcomponents, in an unintuitive teleoperation experience. In addition, using
=== Page 4 ===
mechanical joint regularization effectively prevents the user
from setting custom joint regularization targets for redundancy
resolution.Inconfined-spacemanipulationsettings,theinability
to control the joint regularization target can impair the arm’s
reachability, as demonstrated in Fig. 3.
In contrast, our proposed method leverages the following
null-spaceprojectioncontrollawtoregulatejointpositions[12],
which stabilizes the joint-space at any user-defined desirable
posture without imposing additional end-effector wrenches,
regardless of the arm’s configuration:
τ = (cid:0) I−J†J (cid:1) (−K (q−q )−K q˙) (3)
null n,p rest n,d
where J is the manipulator Jacobian matrix, q is a user-
rest
defined resting posture configuration, K and K are the Fig. 3: Customizable Joint Regularization [Left] Without the
PD gains for the null space projection. N n o , t p e that (cid:0) I n − ,d J†J (cid:1) is flexibility to define the resting joint configuration q rest , the arm’s
reachability is restricted, leading to collisions in confined spaces.
the null-space projector. [Right] Our leader arm allows the user to define custom resting joint
q , helping the follower arm reach targets in confined spaces.
C. Gravity Compensation rest
To ensure the leader arms remain stationary, allowing the IV. FACTR:FORCE-ATTENDINGCURRICULUMTRAINING
user to easily pause teleoperation, we implement gravity Naively incorporating robot force data into policy learning
compensation. This is achieved by modeling the dynamics does not necessarily ensure policy improvement. Contact force
of the leader arm and computing the joint torques required to signals often provide limited discriminative information for
counteract dynamic forces using the recursive Newton-Euler the policy, as it remains close to zero for significant periods
algorithm (RNEA) for real-time inverse dynamics [16]. whenthearmisnotinteractingwiththeenvironmentduringan
episode. As a result, the policy tends to disregard force input
τ =M(q)q¨+C(q,q˙)q˙ +g(q)=RNEA(q,q˙,q¨) (4)
grav
and rely predominantly on visual information, as empirically
where M(q) is the mass (or inertia) matrix, C(q,q˙) is the analyzed in Sec. V-C and Fig. 9.
Coriolis and centrifugal matrix, and g(q) is the gravity vector. To fully leverage the robot force data collected from our
teleoperationsystem,weintroduceForce-AttendingCurriculum
D. Additional Compensation and Controls
Training (FACTR), a training strategy designed to effectively
Toreducetheperceivedfrictionintheleaderarmduringtele-
integrateforceinformationintopolicylearning.FACTRapplies
operation, our system provides friction compensation τ .
friction operators like Gaussian blur or downsampling to corrupt visual
Furthermore, since the leader arm joints lack mechanical joint
information, where the amount of visual corruption decreases
limits,weimplementanartificialpotentialbasedcontrollawto
throughout training. The curriculum intuitively encourages
preventusersfromexceedingjointlimitsofthefollowerarmin
contributionfromtheforcemodalityatthestartoftraining.We
order to respect the workspace of the follower arm. Finally, for
ground this intuition with a theoretical analysis on a simplified
bi-manual follower arms, the system uses Riemannian Motion
scenariothroughtheframeworkofNeuralTangentKernels[11].
Policies [24] for dynamic obstacle avoidance between the two
Inthissection,wefirstpresentthebasepolicymodelusedfor
follower arms. Please refer to Appendix IX for more details.
learning from teleoperated demonstrations, and then motivate
E. Overall Control Law for the Leader Arm and describe FACTR, our curriculum training approach. Our
overall method is summarized in Algorithm 1 and Fig. 4.
In summary, the control torques are defined as follows:
• τ feedback relays external forces from the follower arm A. Problem Statement and Base Model
back to the leader arm, allowing the operator to sense the
We consider a policy π (· | ·) that produces a chunk of
θ
geometric constraints of the environment.
future actions of length k qˆ (joint positions) given (i) a
t:t+k
• τ null resolves kinematic redundancy by regulating the visual observation I (image at time t), and (ii) an external
t
joints at a user-defined rest posture in the null-space.
joint torque reading τ . Our goal is to learn π via behavior
t θ
• τ grav provides gravity compensation for the leader arm. cloning (BC) from a dataset of expert trajectories D. Each
• τ friction compensates for the leader arm joint frictions to trajectory in D comprises tuples (cid:0) I ,τ ,q (cid:1) , where q is the
t t t t
enable smoother teleoperation.
ground-truth (expert) joint position target at time t. We let
• τ limit prevents the joints of the leader arm from violating qˆ be the predicted future joint position targets over the
t:t+k
the joint position limits of the follower arm.
next k time steps. The loss is defined by:
The resulting combined torque applied to the servo motors
(cid:0) (cid:1)
of the leader arm is defined as follows: L = MSE qˆ t:t+k , q t:t+k , (6)
τ =τ feedback +τ null +τ grav +τ friction +τ limit (5) where q t:t+k are the expert’s future joint position targets and
qˆ are the policy’s predictions.
t:t+k
=== Page 5 ===
Pixel Space Curriculum Latent Space Curriculum
… … … …
OR
n = 0 n = Max Iter n = 0 n = Max Iter
σp σl q
n n t:t+k
*
Vision Encoder
… …
f Action
ϕ
* Transformer
π
External θ …
Force Encoder
Joint Torque
𝑔
𝜏 ψ
Fig.4:FACTRallowsourpolicytobetterintegrateforceinformationwithoutoverfittingtovisualinformation,resultinginbettergeneralization
to objects with unseen visual appearances and geometries. Our policy takes as inputs RGB images I and external joint torque τ, which are
then tokenized by a vision encoder and a force encoder before fed into an action transformer to regress joint position targets q . FACTR
t:t+k
appliesablurringoperatorofscaleσ ineitherpixelorlatentspace,initializedatalargevaluethengraduallydecreasedthroughthetraining.
n
Our policy π is based on an encoder-decoder transformer For the force part:
θ
that integrates vision and force modalities. Visual observations (cid:16) √ (cid:17)
α(l) = softmax (A(l)WQ(l))(HE(l)WK(l))⊤/ d .
andforcereadingsareconvertedintotokens,fedtotheencoder, F t,F
then decoded into action tokens through cross attention.
These α(l) and α(l) measure how strongly each action token
V F
A pre-trained vision transformer (ViT) [7, 6] is used to attends to vision vs. force tokens at layer l, and will be the
encode an input image I into a sequence of vision tokens main source of analysis in Sec. V-C.
t
zV t ∈RMv×d for some number of tokens M v and embedding Finally, we project the decoder output HD t to action space,
dimension d. An MLP-based force encoder is applied to the which represents joint position targets for the follower arm:
joint torque τ t , resulting in a single force token: zF t ∈ R1×d. qˆ =MLP (cid:0) HD(cid:1) ∈ Rl×da.
The tokens are concatenated to form the model input: t:t+k t
X = (cid:2) zV; zF(cid:3) ∈ R(Mv+1)×d. where d a is the dimension of the action space. Substituting
t t t qˆ into Eq. 6 gives the full BC objective. Please see
t:t+k
Appendix X for the detailed policy architecture and training
Then, a transformer encoder Enc processes X t via multiple hyperparameters.
self-attention and feed-forward layers:
B. Force-Attending Curriculum
HE t = Enc (cid:0) X t (cid:1) ∈ R(Mv+1)×d. Through experiments, as shown in Sec. V-C and Fig. 9,
we found that naively concatenating force data to the policy
This yields the encoded vision and force tokens.
observationduringtrainingoftenresultsinpoliciesthatneglect
For the decoder, we introduce k action tokens, A∈Rk×d. force input, failing to leverage force input to the fullest extent.
A transformer decoder Dec refines these tokens through self- To address this, we employ a curriculum that gradually unveils
attention and cross-attention to HE: detailed visual information, encouraging the model to learn
t
to utilize force first. Specifically, we define two operators:
HD = Dec (cid:0) A, HE(cid:1) .
t t β P (I, σ n ) for the pixel space, and β L (z, σ n ) for the latent
space,whereσ isascaleparameter(e.g.thestandarddeviation
Duringcrossattention,eachactiontokenattendstobothvision n
and force representations. If we split HE into its vision (V) of a Gaussian kernel or the kernel size of a max pooling
t
operator) that is updated over the course of training for N
and force (F) parts, the cross-attention weights for each layer
total gradient steps. During training, we apply the pixel-space
l can be decomposed as follows. For simplicity of notation,
operator β to image I or β to visual latent tokens zV.
assumetheseweightsarealreadyaveragedovermultipleheads: P t L t
Intuitively, the operators make visual inputs or latent tokens
For the vision part: close in the metric space, thus encouraging more contribution
(cid:16) √ (cid:17) from the force modality, particularly at the start of the training.
α V (l) = softmax (A(l)WQ(l))(HE t,V (l)WK(l))⊤/ d , Consider the limit σ → ∞, each visual input converges to
=== Page 6 ===
Algorithm 1 Force-Attending Curriculum Training (FACTR) TheoreticalAnalysis: WeanalyzetheeffectsofGaussianblur
1: Given: Expert dataset D; action chunking size k; total training as an example of a curriculum operator through the framework
steps N; Pixel-space operator β P (I, σ); latent-space operator of Neural Tangent Kernels (NTK) [11]. Although we consider
β L (z, σ); Scheduler defining σ n for n=1...N a simple two-layer model here, the intuition applies to more
2: Initialize pre-trained ViT f ϕ , force MLP encoder g ψ , and action- complex architectures like vision transformers (ViTs), which
chunking transformer π
θ
have a more sophisticated NTK [2]. The formal theoretical
3: for iteration n=1...N do
4: Sample (cid:0) I t ,τ t , q t (cid:1) from D analysis is presented in Appendix VII.
5: σ n ←Scheduler(n) // get current scale
6: if pixel-space curriculum then D. Curriculum Schedulers
(cid:0) (cid:1)
7: I t ← β P I t , σ n Over the course of training (indexed by n=1,...,N), we
8: end if
adjust σ via a scheduler to control the information released
9: zV t ← f ϕ (I t ) // vision tokens n
10: if latent-space curriculum then from the visual branch. Given a initial scale σ 0 , we consider
11: zV t ← β L (cid:0) zV t , σ n (cid:1) the following schedulers:
12: end if
1 1 4 3 : : q z ˆ t F t :t+ ← k ← g ψ ( π τ θ t (cid:0) ) zV t , // z f F t or (cid:1) ce token Decay Type Scheduler Equation
(cid:0) (cid:1)
15: L = MSEqˆ t:t+k , q t:t+k Constant σ =σ
16: Update ϕ, ψ, θ using ADAM n 0
17: end for Linear σ =σ (cid:0) 1− n(cid:1)
n 0 N
(cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:17)
Cosine σ n = σ 2 0 1+cos n N π
approximately the same tensor. Hence, the model can only Exponential σ =σ ·αn, α>1
n 0
learn a single global output for all visual inputs. Thus, at the (cid:16) (cid:17)
Step σ =σ 1− 1 ⌊ n ⌋ , d >1
early stage of the curriculum, the gradient updates focus more n 0 dsteps N/dsteps steps
on using the force information and updating the force encoder
Furthermore, we warm-up the curriculum by fixing the scale
to maximally differentiate between inputs.
to σ for certain gradient steps, and adjust the decay formula
0
toaccountforthisduration.Therationalebehindthisstepisto
C. Curriculum Operators
warm-up the randomly initialized force encoder with relatively
We consider two types of operators: Gaussian blur and low visual information.
downsampling.
V. EVALUATION
For the Gaussian blur, we define the 2D kernel G as:
σ
A. Experimental Setup
1
(cid:18) x2+y2(cid:19)
G (x,y)= exp − We setup four contact-rich tasks, which are illustrated in
σ 2πσ2 2σ2
Fig. 5 along with the training and testing objects of various
The operator β P (I,σ) applies this kernel using the 2D shapes and visual appearances. For all tasks, we use Franka
convolution operator ∗: Panda arm(s) with OpenManipulator-X gripper(s). Each task
uses either a front ZED2 camera or wrist cameras mounted
β (I,σ)=I∗G
P σ nearthegripperswithRGBobservations.Wedescribethetasks
For the 1D Gaussian blur, the kernel g is defined as: details and the success criteria below.
σ
1 (cid:18) x2 (cid:19) • Box Lift: A bi-manual task where two arms lift a box and
g σ (x)= √ 2πσ exp − 2σ2 balance in the air for at least two seconds, using the front
camera and external joint torque from the arms.
The operator β L (zV,σ) similarily applies this kernel using 1D • Non-Prehensile Pivot: The robot flips an item by pivoting
convolution: it against the corner of a fixture until the item is rotated
β (zV,σ)=zV ∗g by 90◦ and can stand stably, using the front camera and
L σ
external joint torque from the arm.
For downsampling, we use MaxPool followed by nearest
• Fruit Pick and Place: The robot grasps a soft and delicate
interpolation. In 2D, the pixel-space operator β (I) is:
P fruit and places it in a bowl, using the wrist camera and
β (I)=NearestInterp(MaxPool2D(I)) the external joint torque of the gripper.
P
• Rolling Dough: The robot continuously rolls the dough to
In 1D, the latent-space operator β I (zV) is the same except shape it into a cylinder for at least 8 seconds, using the
that a MaxPool1D is used. front camera and the external joint torque of the arm.
By gradually reducing σ , the curriculum ensures that the
n
B. Teleoperation Evaluation
modelfocusesfirstonforcetokens,andthenincorporatesvisual
information in the later stage of the training. This produces a Wecompareourleader-followerteleoperationsystem,which
policy π that more robustly fuses force and vision for control, includes our leader arm with force feedback, gravity compen-
θ
alleviating the issue of overfitting to the vision modality. sation, and redundancy resolution, to an un-actuated leader-
=== Page 7 ===
Train Objects
Test Objects
ACT (Vision-Only) ACT (Vision+Force) FACTR
Fig. 5: Tasks. We evaluate our leader-follower teleoperation system
and autonomous policies trained with FACTR on four contact-rich
tasks.Thesetasksarechallengingastheyrequiretherobottoperceive
andrespondtotheforcefeedbackasitmanipulatesobjectswithunseen
visual appearances and geometries.
follower baseline system with mechanical joint regulation,
similar to [29]. We summarize our results in Fig. 7.
Our experiments show that our system allows users to
complete tasks with 64.7% higher task completion rate, 37.4%
reduced completion time, and 83.3% improvement in the
subjective ease of use metrics.
We observe that for tasks that require continuous contact
betweenthearmandanobject,suchasnon-prehensilepivoting
and bimanual box lifting, the un-actuated teleoperation system
often causes the follower arm to lose contact with the object.
This occurs because of the absence of force feedback, which
prevents the user from perceiving the environment’s geometric
constraints through the leader arms. As a result, maintaining
continuous contact with the object becomes challenging.
For the un-actuated system, the follower arm frequently
exceedsitsjointvelocitylimitswhenmovingundercontinuous
contact. This occurs because the operator can easily maneuver
the leader arms in ways that cause significant deviations
between the leader and follower joint positions, especially
when the follower arm is in contact with the environment.
Whencontactislost,theresultinglargejoint-spaceerrorcauses
the PID controller to generate large torques, causing abrupt
movements that exceed the velocity limits. On the other hand,
our system’s force feedback renders geometric constraints of
the environment for the operator through the leader arms,
etaR
sseccuS
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Box Lift Pivot Fruit Pick-Place Rolling Dough
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
Box Lift Pivot Fruit Pick-Place Rolling Dough
etaR
sseccuS
Fig. 6: FACTR leads to better object generalization.
preventing the operator from moving the leader arms too far
away from the follower arms during environment contacts.
C. Policy Evaluation
Questions. In our real-world evaluation, we seek to address
the following research questions regarding FACTR:
• How does FACTR perform compared to baseline ap-
proaches that do not use force feedback and ones that use
force feedback without FACTR?
• How do different curriculum parameters affect policy
performance?
TrainingandEvaluationProtocol.Wecollected50demon-
strationswithourteleoperationsystem.Wetrainedeachmethod
with the same hyperparameters, where details can be found in
the Appendix X. We compare the following methods:
• ACT (Vision-Only) [32]: Action Chunking Transformer
which only takes in visual observation.
• ACT (Vision+Force) [13, 14]: Action Chunking Trans-
former which takes in both visual and force observation,
but trained without a curriculum.
• FACTR(Ours):ActionChunkingTransformertrainedwith
Force-Attending Curriculum. For each task, we train a
latent space curriculum with the Guassian Blur operator
and linear scheduler. We discuss more detailed ablations
on the curriculum in Sec. V-D.
For each object in each task, we evaluated 5-10 trials. We
presenttheaveragesuccessratefortrainingandtestingobjects,
respectively. Detailed evaluation results for each object can be
found in the Appendix XII.
FACTR leads to better generalization. We present our
main quantitative results in Fig. 6. All the policies perform
similarly on the train objects for most tasks, except for the
rolling dough task, where the vision-only policy smashes the
dough without any rolling actions and fails completely. Note
that the visual observations are hard to distinguish during
the oscillatory rolling motions, while the force signals form
=== Page 8 ===
a) Completion Rate ↑ b) Completion Time (sec) ↓ c) Ease of Use ↑
1.0 25 5
0.8 20 4
0.6 15 3
0.4 10 2
0.2 5 1
0.0 0 0
Box Lift Pivot Pick-Place Rolling Box Lift Pivot Pick-Place Rolling Box Lift Pivot Pick-Place Rolling
Un-Actuated Leader-Follower Ours
Fig. 7: User study. FACTR teleoperation system allows users to complete tasks with significantly higher success rate, using less time, and
they subjectively found our system to be easier to use.
Duringpolicyrollout,wevisualizetheaveragecrossattention
of the action tokens to the force or vision tokens of the first
decoder layer as shown in Fig. 9. FACTR learns to attend to
force more during task execution. For example, in the box
lifting task, attention to force outweighs that of vision as the
arms contact the box, signaling a mode switch. While without
the curriculum, the policy does not pay enough attention to
force, and either fails to lift or balance the novel boxes.
FACTRleadstobetterrecoverybehavior.Anothernotable
observation is that FACTR also facilitates recovery behavior.
Specifically, we evaluate the box-lifting task with five trials
per object. A trial begins when the policy successfully lifts
the box for the first time; we then knock the box down and
assess the second attempt. As shown in Table I, all policies
maintain nearly 100% recovery success on training objects.
However, for test objects, the vision-only policy’s success rate
Fig. 8: WevisualizetheexternaljointtorquenormoftheFrankaarm
drops significantly from 31.7% on the first attempt to 13.3%
for a collected trajectory. Blue highlights indicate pre-contact phases,
whilepurpleandgreenmarktorquepeaksandtroughsatthedough’s on the second. In contrast, force-attending policies maintain
left and right ends, respectively. The oscillatory torque pattern helps similar success rates across both attempts.
the policy distinguish observations despite similar visual inputs. Weobservethatvision-onlypoliciesoftenremainstaticafter
the box is knocked down, failing to retry. We hypothesize that
a corresponding oscillatory pattern, as shown in Fig. 8; this this occurs because the vision-only policy overfits to training
distinctive torque pattern helps policies with force input to scenarios, making it unresponsive to unseen objects outside its
complete the task. training distribution. In contrast, FACTR policies detect loss of
Forthetestobjects,thevision-onlypolicyachievesasuccess contact through external joint torque readings, which revert to
rate of 21.3% on average, which is significantly worse than pre-lift values when the object is dropped. Since our FACTR
policies incorporating force. Without a curriculum, policies policies effectively attend to force input, they successfully
naively incorporating force achieve a success rate of 61.2%, recover to a pre-lift state and attempt the task again.
while FACTR achieves a success rate of 87.5%, which shows
thatFACTRleadstosignificantlybettergeneralizationtonovel Train Objects Test Objects
objects. We hypothesize that the force information provides
ACT (Vision-Only) 4/5 4/30
importantsignalsformodeswitchingatmomentssuchaswhen
ACT (Vision+Force) 5/5 16/30
the robots get into contact with the box in the lifting task and
when the object is grasped in the fruit pickup task. FACTR 3/3 27/30
Policies with FACTR learns to identify mode switching.
TABLE I: Evaluation of recovery behaviors for box lifting.
To better understand the policies trained with FACTR. We
visualize the attention behavior during policy training and D. Ablations on Curriculum
inference. Specifically, we visualize the cross attention of the To further validate the significance of a curriculum, we
action tokens to the memory tokens denoted as α(1) and α(1) trained models with fixed σ across training. Moreover, to
V F n
for the first layer of the decoder, where α(1) and α(1) are ablateonpixelspaceandlatentspacecurriculum,anddifferent
V F
defined in Sec. IV. scheduler and operator choices, we train policies on different
=== Page 9 ===
FACTR (Ours)
noitnettA
No FACTR (Baseline)
noitnettA
1 1
0 0
Time Steps Time Steps
Vision Force
Fig. 9: Policies trained with FACTR learns to identify mode switching. We visualize the average cross attention of the action tokens to
the force or vision tokens of the first decoder layer during policy rollout. [Left] Without the curriculum, the policy does not pay enough
attention to force, and either fails to lift or balance the novel boxes. [Right] FACTR learns to attend to force more to complete the task. For
example, in the box lifting task, attention to force outweighs that of vision as the arms contact the box, signaling a mode switch.
combination of these parameters. We choose the task of ization in contact-rich tasks. FACTR leverages a blurring
pivoting, one of the hardest tasks from our task suite, for operator with decreasing scales on the visual information
the ablations. We evaluate only on the five test objects for five throughout training. This encourages the policy to leverage
trialseach,sincetheyaremoreindicativeofpolicyperformance force input at the beginning stages of training, preventing
than train objects. The results are presented in TABLE II. the problem where the policy overfits to visual input and
thus neglects force input. This approach was demonstrated
Pixel Space Latent Space through a series of experiments on the following tasks: box
Blur Downsample Blur Downsample lifting,non-prehensilepivoting,fruitpick-and-place,androlling
dough, where FACTR exhibits significant improvements in
Constant 16/25 15/25 17/25 16/25
task completion rates and generalization to unseen object
Linear 19/25 18/25 19/25 18/25 appearances and geometries. Additionally, our teleoperation
Cosine 20/25 19/25 17/25 19/25 system, which includes an actuated leader arm for force
Exp 19/25 21/25 20/25 19/25 feedback and gravity compensation, was shown to provide
Step 19/25 18/25 20/25 19/25 a more intuitive user experience, as evidenced by higher task
completion rates and user satisfaction in our studies.
TABLE II: Curriculum ablation.
While FACTR demonstrates significant improvements in
Fixed-Scale Operator vs. Curriculum. We found that force-based policy learning for contact-rich tasks, it has limita-
performancewithacurriculumofdecayingsmoothingperforms tions. First, the precision of the external joint torque sensors
better than a fixed curriculum across all tasks. We hypothesize in our follower arm is limited. This limitation can particularly
that to enable better performance, the final policy needs to affect tasks that involve subtle force adjustments during fine-
take in the fully unblurred vision information. Through the grainedmanipulationsincethetorquereadingscanbetoonoisy
curriculum,apolicygetstograduallyadapttounblurredimages. to be used effectively. Future work could explore integrating
On the other hand, with fixed smoothing, even though policy high-resolution tactile sensors or haptic gloves to enhance
may not overfit to visual information, it cannot extract the feedback precision and improve overall system performance.
necessary details from unblurred vision to complete the tasks. Second, our approach assumes the availability of external joint
Comparisonswithotherschedulerparameters.Wefurther torque sensors in the follower arms. Future work can explore
comparepoliciestrainedwitheitherpixelspaceorlatentspace, adapting our system for an arm mounted with an end-effector
two operators (Gaussian blur and downsample) as defined in force-torque sensor. Third, the effectiveness of our curriculum
Sec. IV-C, and four schedulers (linear, cosine, exponential, learningapproachcanbeinfluencedbyseveralhyperparameters,
and step) as defined in Sec. IV-D. However, we do not find a such as the choice of the blurring operator and scheduling
uniform advantage or disadvantage for any set of parameters. strategies. These parameters can be highly task-dependent,
The results suggest that FACTR is relatively robust to different requiringextensivetuningfordifferentapplications.Developing
sets of curriculum parameters. adaptiveorself-tuningcurriculumstrategiescouldhelpmitigate
this issue by dynamically adjusting hyperparameters based on
VI. CONCLUSIONANDLIMITATIONS
task-specific requirements. Addressing these limitations could
WeintroducedFACTR,acurriculumapproachtotrainforce- further enhance FACTR’s applicability and robustness across
based policies to improve performance and object general- a broader range of contact-rich manipulation tasks.
=== Page 10 ===
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS in neural networks. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 31, 2018.
We thank Arthur Allshire, Andrew Wang, Mohan Kumar
[12] Oussama Khatib. A unified approach for motion and
Srirama, Ritvik Singh for discussions about the paper. We also
forcecontrolofrobotmanipulators:Theoperationalspace
thank Tiffany Tse, Ray Liu, Sri Anumakonda, Sheqi Zhang
formulation. IEEE Journal on Robotics and Automation,
with teleoperation. This work is supported in part by ONR
3(1):43–53, 1987.
MURI N00014-22-1-2773, ONR MURI N00014-24-1-2748
[13] Masato Kobayashi, Thanpimon Buamanee, and Takumi
and AFOSR FA9550-23-1-0747.
Kobayashi. Alpha-α and bi-act are all you need: Im-
portance of position and force information control for
REFERENCES
imitation learning of unimanual and bimanual robotic
[1] SanjeevArora,SimonSDu,WeiHu,ZhiyuanLi,RussR manipulation with low-cost system. arXiv preprint
Salakhutdinov,andRuosongWang. Onexactcomputation arXiv:2411.09942, 2024.
with an infinitely wide neural net. Advances in neural [14] Kelin Li, Shubham M Wagh, Nitish Sharma, Saksham
information processing systems, 32, 2019. Bhadani, Wei Chen, Chang Liu, and Petar Kormushev.
[2] EnricBoix-Adsera,OmidSaremi,EmmanuelAbbe,Samy Haptic-act: Bridging human intuition with compliant
Bengio, Etai Littwin, and Joshua Susskind. When can robotic manipulation via immersive vr. arXiv preprint
transformers reason with abstract symbols? International arXiv:2409.11925, 2024.
Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. [15] Wenhai Liu, Junbo Wang, Yiming Wang, Weiming Wang,
[3] Claire Chen, Zhongchun Yu, Hojung Choi, Mark and Cewu Lu. Forcemimic: Force-centric imitation
Cutkosky,andJeannetteBohg.Dexforce:Extractingforce- learningwithforce-motioncapturesystemforcontact-rich
informed actions from kinesthetic demonstrations for manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07554, 2024.
dexterousmanipulation. arXivpreprintarXiv:2501.10356, [16] Kevin M. Lynch and Frank C. Park. Modern Robotics:
2025. Mechanics, Planning, and Control. Cambridge University
[4] Cheng Chi, Siyuan Feng, Yilun Du, Zhenjia Xu, Eric Press, USA, 1st edition, 2017.
Cousineau, Benjamin Burchfiel, and Shuran Song. Dif- [17] Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Josiah Wong, Soroush
fusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action Nasiriany,ChenWang,RohunKulkarni,LiFei-Fei,Silvio
diffusion. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2023. Savarese, Yuke Zhu, and Roberto Mart´ın-Mart´ın. What
[5] Cheng Chi, Zhenjia Xu, Chuer Pan, Eric Cousineau, matters in learning from offline human demonstrations
Benjamin Burchfiel, Siyuan Feng, Russ Tedrake, and forrobotmanipulation. InConferenceonRobotLearning,
Shuran Song. Universal manipulation interface: In-the- pages 1678–1690. PMLR, 2022.
wild robot teaching without in-the-wild robots. Robotics: [18] Matthew T Mason. Compliance and force control for
Science and Systems, 2024. computer controlled manipulators. IEEE Transactions on
[6] Sudeep Dasari, Mohan Kumar Srirama, Unnat Jain, and Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 11(6):418–432, 1981.
Abhinav Gupta. An unbiased look at datasets for visuo- [19] Mayank Mittal, Calvin Yu, Qinxi Yu, Jingzhou Liu,
motor pre-training. In Conference on Robot Learning, Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Jia Lin Yuan, Ritvik Singh,
pages 1183–1198. PMLR, 2023. Yunrong Guo, Hammad Mazhar, Ajay Mandlekar, Buck
[7] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Babich, Gavriel State, Marco Hutter, and Animesh Garg.
Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Orbit: A unified simulation framework for interactive
Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, robot learning environments. IEEE Robotics and Automa-
Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: tion Letters, 8(6):3740–3747, 2023.
Transformers for image recognition at scale. In Interna- [20] G. Morel and S. Dubowsky. The precise control of
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. manipulatorswithjointfriction:abaseforce/torquesensor
[8] Zihao He, Hongjie Fang, Jingjing Chen, Hao-Shu Fang, method. InProceedingsofIEEEInternationalConference
and Cewu Lu. Foar: Force-aware reactive policy on Robotics and Automation, volume 1, pages 360–365
for contact-rich robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint vol.1, 1996.
arXiv:2411.15753, 2024. [21] H. Olsson, K.J. A˚stro¨m, C. Canudas de Wit, M. Ga¨fvert,
[9] Neville Hogan. Impedance control: An approach to and P. Lischinsky. Friction models and friction com-
manipulation.In1984Americancontrolconference,pages pensation. European Journal of Control, 4(3):176–195,
304–313. IEEE, 1984. 1998.
[10] YifanHou,ZeyiLiu,ChengChi,EricCousineau,Naveen [22] Lorenzo Pagliara, Enrico Ferrentino, Andrea Chiacchio,
Kuppuswamy, Siyuan Feng, Benjamin Burchfiel, and and Giovanni Russo. Safe haptic teleoperations of
Shuran Song. Adaptive compliance policy: Learning admittance controlled robots with virtualization of the
approximate compliance for diffusion guided control. force feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07672, 2024.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.09309, 2024. [23] WilliamPeeblesandSainingXie. Scalablediffusionmod-
[11] Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Cle´ment Hongler. els with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and generalization international conference on computer vision, pages 4195–
=== Page 11 ===
4205, 2023.
[24] Nathan D. Ratliff, Jan Issac, and Daniel Kappler. Rie-
mannian motion policies. CoRR, abs/1801.02854, 2018.
[25] Kenneth Shaw, Yulong Li, Jiahui Yang, Mohan Kumar
Srirama, Ray Liu, Haoyu Xiong, Russell Mendonca, and
Deepak Pathak. Bimanual dexterity for complex tasks.
In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2024.
[26] Bruno Siciliano, Oussama Khatib, and Torsten Kro¨ger.
Springer handbook of robotics, volume 200. Springer,
2008.
[27] Shuran Song, Andy Zeng, Johnny Lee, and Thomas
Funkhouser. Grasping in the wild: Learning 6dof closed-
loop grasping from low-cost demonstrations. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(3):4978–4985, 2020.
[28] Weiyao Wang, Du Tran, and Matt Feiszli. What makes
training multi-modal classification networks hard? In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
visionandpatternrecognition,pages12695–12705,2020.
[29] Philipp Wu, Yide Shentu, Zhongke Yi, Xingyu Lin, and
Pieter Abbeel. Gello: A general, low-cost, and intuitive
teleoperation framework for robot manipulators. In 2024
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), pages 12156–12163. IEEE, 2024.
[30] Yansong Wu, Zongxie Chen, Fan Wu, Lingyun Chen,
Liding Zhang, Zhenshan Bing, Abdalla Swikir, Alois
Knoll, and Sami Haddadin. Tacdiffusion: Force-domain
diffusion policy for precise tactile manipulation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2409.11047, 2024.
[31] WilliamXie,StefanCaldararu,andNikolausCorrell. Just
addforcefordelicaterobotpolicies.CoRL2024Workshop
onMasteringRobotManipulationinaWorldofAbundant
Data, 2024.
[32] Tony Z Zhao, Vikash Kumar, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea
Finn. Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with
low-cost hardware. Robotics: Science and Systems, 2023.
[33] Qi Zhu, Jing Du, Yangming Shi, and Paul Wei. Neu-
robehavioral assessment of force feedback simulation in
industrial robotic teleoperation. Automation in Construc-
tion, 126:103674, 2021.
=== Page 12 ===
APPENDIX where K
σ
∗ x is the convolution of x with a Gaussian
kernel K . Assuming that the model has infinite width and the
VII. ANALYSISOFFACTRFROMNEURALTANGENT σ
parameters in W are initialized from a Gaussian distribution,
KERNEL(NTK)PERSPECTIVE
the NTK for this model is:
Inthissection,weaimtogiveasketchofamoretheoretical
argumentforwhyoperatorslikeGaussianblurordownsampling
in FACTR could help the policy attending to force input. We k (x,x′)=E [⟨∇ f(x),∇ f(x′)⟩]
σ W∼N(0,I) W W
will first briefly introduce Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK), and
=E ⟨K ∗x,K ∗x′⟩.
then use it a theoretical framework to analyze the effects of W∼N(0,I) σ σ
Gaussian blur as an example curriculum operator. This is the dot product between the convolved inputs K ∗x
σ
and K ∗x′. As σ increases, the Gaussian convolution K ∗x
A. Preliminaries on Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) σ σ
actsasalow-passfilter,attenuatinghigh-frequencycomponents
TheNeuralTangentKernel(NTK)isatheoreticalframework
in the input x. This causes the convolved inputs K ∗x and
σ i
usedtoanalyzethebehaviorofneuralnetworks,particularlyin
K ∗x to become more similar for any pair of inputs x and
σ j i
the limit of infinite width [11, 1]. For a neural network f (x)
θ x . In the extreme case where σ →∞, K ∗x ≈K ∗x for
j σ i σ j
with parameters θ, the NTK is defined as:
allx ,x ,andtheNTKk (x ,x )approachesaconstantvalue.
i j σ i j
k(x ,x )=⟨∇ f (x ),∇ f (x )⟩, This implies that the kernel matrix K becomes approximately
i j θ θ i θ θ j
an all-ones matrix, scaled by the magnitude of the convolved
where ∇ θ f θ (x) is the gradient of the network’s output with inputs.
respect to its parameters θ, and ⟨·,·⟩ denotes the inner product.
In our curriculum, we decrease σ, where the model is first
In the infinite width limit, the NTK becomes deterministic and
exposed to smoother visual data before gradually transitioning
remains constant during training. Assuming the parameters θ
to the original unsmoothed data. At the beginning of the
are initialized from a Gaussian distribution, the NTK k(x ,x )
i j curriculum, the model focuses on low-frequency patterns and
converges to a deterministic kernel k (x ,x ) given by:
∞ i j robust features from visual inputs. As σ decreases to small σ,
k (x ,x )=E [⟨∇ f (x ),∇ f (x )⟩], the NTK retains discriminative power, allowing the model to
∞ i j θ∼N(0,I) θ θ i θ θ j
learn fine-grained features from visual inputs. . This gradual
wheretheexpectationistakenovertheGaussianinitialization increaseincomplexitycanhelpthemodellearnmoreeffectively
of θ. byavoidingoverfittingtothehigh-frequencyvariationsinvisual
The NTK k(x i ,x j ) is a similarity function: if k(x i ,x j ) is inputs in the early stages of training.
large, then the predictions f (x ) and f (x ) will tend to be
θ i θ j More rigorously, consider the limit σ → ∞, each blurred
close.Ifwehaventrainingpoints(x ,y ),k definesapositive
i i input K ∗x converges to the same vector ϕ. Hence,
semi-definite(PSD)kernelmatrixK ∈Rn×n whereeachentry σ i
+
K
ij
=k(x
i
,x
j
). k
σ
(x
i
,x
j
) = ⟨ϕ,ϕ⟩ = ∥ϕ∥2,
Fascinatingly, when we train this infinite-width neural
and the NTK matrix K becomes
network with gradient flow on the squared error, we precisely
 
know the model output at any point in training. At time t, the 1 1 ··· 1
training residual is given by: 1 1 ··· 1
K = ∥ϕ∥2 

. .
.
. .
.
... . .
.
 

.
f (x)−y =e−ηKt(f (x)−y),
θt θ0 1 1 ··· 1
where η is the learning rate, K is the kernel matrix, and This matrix is rank-1, with largest eigenvalue λ = n∥ϕ∥2
f (x) is the initial model output. This equation shows that
θ0 (for n training points) and corresponding eigenvector v =
the residual error decays exponentially with a rate determined
(1,1,...,1).
by the kernel matrix K.
Recall that in the infinite-width NTK regime, the training
B. Analyzing the Effects of Gaussian Blur with NTK residual r satisfies
We analyze the effects of Gaussian blur as an example r(t) = e−ηKtr(0),
of a curriculum operator. While we consider a simple two-
layer model here, the intuition applies to more complex where r(0) = f θ0 (x)−y is the initial residual. Decompose
architectures like vision transformers (ViTs), which have a r(0) into components parallel and perpendicular to v:
more sophisticated NTK [2].
r(0) = r +r , with r ∝v and r ·v =0.
∥ ⊥ ∥ ⊥
Consideramodelwheretheinputxisfirstconvolvedwitha
Gaussian kernel K before being passed through the network, Since K is rank-1,
σ
where σ is the standard deviation of the Gaussian kernel. The
e−ηKtr(0) = r + e−ηλtr .
output of the model is: ⊥ ∥
The parallel component decays exponentially at rate λ, while
f(x)=WT(K ∗x), the perpendicular component is unchanged. This effectively
σ
=== Page 13 ===
learns a single global scalar for all inputs, reducing mean- where µ is a calibrated static friction coefficient and f is the
s
squared error by matching the average label but losing control loop frequency, set to 500 Hz.
discriminative power. Thus, at the early state of the curriculum, We also account for kinetic friction by compensating for
the gradient updates will focus on using the force information Coulomb friction and viscous friction as follows [21]:
and updating the force encoder to maximally differentiate
τ(i) =µ(i)sgn(q˙(i))+µ(i)q˙(i) (8)
between inputs. ks c v
where µ is the Coulomb friction coefficient and µ is viscous
c v
VIII. COSTANALYSISOFOURTELEOPERATIONSYSTEM
friction coefficient.
WITHFORCEFEEDBACK
The total friction compensation τ is the sum of the
friction
Please see Table III for a detailed Bill of Materials and static friction τ and kinetic friction τ terms.
ss ks
breakdown of the cost to create one leader arm and leader
B. Joint Limit Avoidance
gripperaspartofourteleoperationwithforcefeedbacksystem.
This is accurate pricing as of the paper release. Weimplementthefollowingartificialpotential-basedcontrol
law to prevent the operator from making the leader arm go
beyond the joint limits of the follower arm:
Object Quantity Total
D
D
y
y
n
n
a
a
m
m
i
i
x
x
e
e
l
l
X
X
M
C3
4
3
3
0
0
-
-
T
W
28
2
8
1
-
0
T
-T 2
6
$
$
5
5
3
3
9
9
.
.
8
4
0
0 U(q(i))=
 
1
1 2 η
η
(q(i)− 1
1
q
m
(i
in
))2 ,
,
q
q
(
(
i
i
)
)
<
>
q
q
m (
(
i
i
i )
)
n +
−
∆
∆
q
q (9)
U
12
2
V
D2
20
C
A
on
P
t
o
ro
w
l
e
P
r
C
S
B
upply
1
1
$
$
3
2
2
4
.
.
1
9
0
9
0 2
,
(qm (i a ) x−q(i))2
otherwis
m
e
ax
FPX330-S102 Servo Bracket 1 $8.70
τ(i) =−∇ U(q(i)) (10)
Polymaker PLA PRO Filament 1 $24.99 limit q(i)
U2D2 Power Hub Board 1 $19.99 where U(q(i)) is the repulsive potential function, ∆q is the
14AWG Cable 1 $23.99 safety margin, and η is the scaling factor.
3/4” Bearing 1 $6.99
Screws - $15.99 C. Bi-manual Follower Arms Control with Dynamic Collision
Avoidance
Total $1229.95
Most existing bi-manual teleoperation systems with a leader-
follower setup command the follower arms by directly setting
TABLE III: We present the bill of materials of one leader arm
the joint position targets to the current joint positions of the
teleoperation device with force feedback. The total cost is around
leader arm. Instead, we employ a Riemannian Motion Policy
$1229.95.
(RMP) [24] implemented in Isaac Lab [19], where the RMP
dynamically generates joint-space targets for the follower arms
IX. ADDITIONALCONTROLLAWSFOROUR
that best match the current joint positions of the leader arms
TELEOPERATIONSYSTEM
while incorporating real-time collision avoidance. Our system
Here we define the additional control laws for our teleoper- prevents the follower arms from colliding with one another
ation system with force feedback: friction compensation and or with external obstacles, such as the table, regardless of the
joint limit avoidance. operator’s actions.
A. Friction Compensation X. BEHAVIORCLONINGPOLICYARCHITECTUREAND
TRAININGHYPERPARAMETERS
Joint friction introduces resistive forces that impair re-
sponsiveness, making precise motion control challenging and Our behavior cloning policy takes as input a RGB image
reducing the system’s intuitive feel for the operator [20]. and current hand joint angles (proprioception). We obtain
Friction also increases the physical effort required to back- tokens for the image observation via a ViT [7] and a token for
drive the motor, leading to operator fatigue during prolonged joint proprioception via a linear layer. The weights of ViT is
use. To this end, we use a dynamic friction model to explicitly initialized from the Soup 1M model from [6]. The tokens then
compensate for static, Coulomb, and viscous friction [21]. pass through action chunking transformer, an encoder-decoder
We mitigate the effects of static friction by introducing a transformer, to output a sequence of actions [32]. The action
small, high-frequency oscillatory signal to the control input, space is the absolute joint angles of the two arms for box lift,
which generates micro-vibrations that prevent the motors the absolute angles of a single arm for non-prehensile pivot
from settling into static friction states, thereby enabling and rolling dough, and the absolute angles of a arm and the
smoothertransitionsfromresttomotion[21].Thestaticfriction gripper for fruit pick and place. A key decision that greatly
compensation torque τ is as follows: improves policy generalization is to exclude current arm joints
ss
(cid:40) from the proprioception. Intuitively, this may force the model
µ(i)cos(πt) if q˙(i) <q˙(i),
τ(i) = s f s (7) to extract object information from image observations, rather
ss
0 otherwise than overfitting to predict actions close to current arm states.
=== Page 14 ===
Hyperparameter Value FACTR AdaNorm NoiseAug
Train(%) 90.0 25.0 85.0
Behavior Policy Training
Test(%) 77.7 6.1 65.0
Optimizer AdamW
TABLE V: Pivot task training and testing performance.
Base Learning Rate 3e-4
Weight Decay 0.05
BoxLift Pivot RollingDough
Optimizer Momentum β ,β =0.9,0.95
1 2
ACT(Vision-Only) 35/120 30/130 0/60
Batch Size 128
Bi-ACT 68/120 76/130 41/60
Learning Rate Schedule Cosine Decay
FACTR(Ours) 105/120 101/130 46/60
Total Steps 20000-50000
Warmup Steps 500 TABLE VI: Policy evaluation on unseen objects across 3 tasks.
Augmentation RandomResizeCrop
GPU RTX4090 (24 gb)
Wall-Clock Time 2-6 hours
Visual Backbone ViT Architecture
Patch Size 16
# Layers 12
# MHSA Heads 12
Fig. 10: We more than doubled the testing set size across 3 tasks.
Hidden Dim 768
Class Token Yes leverage vision altogether. Our curriculum approach eliminates
Positional Encoding sin cos such tradeoff between vision and force, allowing the policy to
attend properly to both force and vision.
Action Chunking Transformer Architecture
Moretestobjects.Wedoubledthenumberoftestingobjects
# Encoder Layers 6
used in three of our tasks, visualized in Fig. 10 and updated
# Decoder Layers 6
the success rate comparison figure in Tab. VI. By conducting
# MHSA Heads 8
testing on more unseen objects and comparing with the best
Hidden Dim 512
performing baseline (Bi-ACT), we observe that our method
Feed-Forward Dim 2048
yields an improved generalization performance.
Dropout 0.1
Positional Encoding sin cos XII. DETAILEDQUANTITATIVERESULTS
Action Chunk 100 We present the detailed evaluation results for each task in
TABLE VII, VIII, IX, and X.
TABLE IV: Policy Architecture and Training Hyperparameters
We list key hyperparameters for our behavior policy training
Table IV. In general, we are able to obtain well-performing
policies with 20000-50000 gradient steps and 2-6 hours of
wall-clock time training on a RTX4090.
XI. ADDITIONALEXPERIMENTS
Adaptive Layer Norm as an Alternative to a Curriculum
As an alternative to a curriculum, we experimented with
Adaptive Normalization Layers [23] on the action tokens
conditionedontheforceinputtoimprovetheforceconditioning
(AdaNorm in Tab. V). However, we found that it creates
instability in training and leads to overfitting.
Data Augmentation as alternative to curriculum. We run
10 data augmentation experiments varying noise probabilities
and noise levels applied to vision input. The best of these
policies, shown as DataAug in Tab. V. We find that policies
trained with lower augmentation levels perform well on train
objects but worse than FACTR on test objects, likely because
low levels of augmentations fail to facilitate proper attention to
force. Higher levels of augmentation policies do not perform
well across train and test sets, likely because they fail to
=== Page 15 ===
Train Test Train Avg Test Avg
Box1 Box2 Box3 Box4 Box5 Box6 Box7
ACT (Vision-Only) 10/10 7/10 1/10 1/10 6/10 3/10 1/10 100.0% 31.7%
ACT (Vision+Force) 10/10 2/10 4/10 4/10 10/10 10/10 5/10 100.0% 58.3%
FACTR 10/10 8/10 7/10 10/10 10/10 10/10 10/10 100.0% 91.7%
TABLE VII: Comparison of methods for Box Lift task.
Train Test Train Avg Test Avg
Box1 Box2 Box3 Box4 Box5 Box6 Box7
ACT (Vision-Only) 10/10 9/10 3/10 0/10 7/10 2/10 1/10 95.0% 26.0%
ACT (Vision+Force) 9/10 9/10 1/10 2/10 9/10 4/10 5/10 90.0% 42.0%
FACTR 9/10 9/10 6/10 5/10 10/10 7/10 10/10 90.0% 76.0%
TABLE VIII: Comparison of methods for Non-Prehensile Pivot task.
Train Test Train Avg Test Avg
Obj1 Obj2 Obj3 Obj4
ACT (Vision-Only) 5/5 0/5 4/5 0/5 100.0% 26.7%
ACT (Vision+Force) 5/5 3/5 4/5 4/5 100.0% 73.3%
FACTR 5/5 4/5 5/5 5/5 100.0% 93.3%
TABLE IX: Comparison of methods for Fruit Pick-Place task.
Train Test Train Avg Test Avg
Obj1 Obj2 Obj3 Obj4
ACT (Vision-Only) 0/5 0/5 0/5 0/5 0.0% 0.0%
ACT (Vision+Force) 4/5 4/5 3/5 4/5 80.0% 70.0%
FACTR 5/5 4/5 4/5 4/5 90.0% 80.0%
TABLE X: Comparison of methods for Rolling Dough task.